---
title: Abundance
date: 2025-12
tags: abundance
---
>Introduction: Beyond Scarcity
... is a choice – we choose it over productivity, when incompetence makes politics believe, that "getting rid of the problem" means banning it / kicking it out / forgetting, instead of solving.
>1: Grow
...ing stuff is super hard because of the tendency to burn bridges behind one, as one considers his status comfortable. It happens through disallowing people from starting out poor and aggregating their productivity, through introduction of standards, especially in housing. Effectively, living in a city has been made into something exclusive, that poor turn away from – and without them, the progress stagnates (important: physical proximity is crucial to technical advance, and e-conferencing did not change it.)
Additionally, the climate issue is taken under discussion. Degrowth, the idea of protection through scaleback is criticised (i agree), and progress towards energy abundance through more efficient green energy is laid out as superior (also agree). The main point: fossil fuels are finite, burning them is a caveman-level practice, and the fumes slowly kill us btw. Instead, we can use green energy. It is cool, not because it is green, but because we have an unfathomably large entity above us that is doing the burning instead of us (it is called sun), and it is our technology of harnessing it that will allow us to achieve energy abundance, and other (general) abundance shall follow.

>2. Build
...ing, as covered in growing, is hard amid all those restrictions. Initially, the chapter investigates whether it is the government that shall carry the blame for failure to complete the California high-speed rail project; environmental decisions and lawsuits are important, as they take time, and as costs grow ~5%/year regardless of inflation... well, inflates the money, the budget for the thing doesn't get anyhow adjusted for that. And as core argument: other countries also have governments, and they manage to build despite them.
Then there is an analysis of how lawyery US of A are; as a country becomes highly developed, it introduces protections. Those protections get complicated to such extent, that incentives are shifted – a decently-smart person earns more from arguing than from building (precedence-based law adds to that, as courts become the deciding entities). Furthermore, reaching back to climate – the Dems are the ones who came up with "more processes will allow oversight and prevent the bad stuff from being built". It worked, but it has NOT increased throughput legitimacy (processes > outcome). Effectively, USA have simultaneously inefficient and not trusted (16%!) government, and they cannot "no-no their way to the future", as it requires building. And shortcuts through the bs are not enough; it is the...

>3. Govern
...ance, that must change. How-though-is being explained mostly on examples from construction sites and governments. I suspect a large part of this being written for articles beforehand, but frankly, i don't mind it. While at first i thought this will be boring – well, it is not, not at all; i felt the need of taking a photo with my phone every second page, the stories were so, fucking, ridiculous.
Important talking points:
- government software is like sediment – new layers get mounted atop of the old
- there is years of procurement in line with bs standards instead of arguing about them, because politicians use public money, hence get rewarded regardless of effects (no incentive to do well)
- government tries to achieve and comply with everything at once (include ALL minorities and protect ALL wild life and so on at once – while all noble, absolutely detrimental to achieving any of them)
government always adds requirements, but rarely makes concessions, i.e. it is unable to make trade-offs.
- "government prefers to allow projects to go badly by the book" instead of hiring people capable of making trade-offs and taking risks = there are reasons for all those rules we talk so badly so much about, and they are here to do good, but at these numbers they make building impossible.

GENERAL TAKEAWAY: In such system, processes designed to introduce or incentivise 'good' are actually prohibiting the 'good' from happening.
>4. Invent
... is to allow smart people to follow their weird fixations without prejudice to immediate practical implementation; it is to properly fund them without much of an administrative burden; for the government to step in on both supply and demand subsidies on projects no single company will embark on; to employ both push and pull investments (up-fronts or success-rewards respectively); it is to diversify the funding methodology; and crucially, to not be risk-averse. Finally, it is to allow science to play out on its own, and the small increments of progress will connect to form the future.

>5. Deploy 
... is to not obstruct, and also some ideas mentioned in "invent" – especially those connected to investment methods (both points are written at once, and I feel no inclination to rewrite them).

>6. Towards Abundance 
... is a path that leads aligned to further optimisation of current procedures of invention, production and deployment, and simultaneous change in approach to how we legislate, create institutions, and govern in all other manners.

At least according to this book; with all of the above I do not necessarily agree (although mostly I do).

>>comment
This is just a summary, I will add a proper review later (i hope). Nevertheless, it must be said: this book is *not* about abundance; its title is super, fucking, misleading, the Gates' quoted opinion on the back is 100% sponsored (his foundation is brought up super randomly within the text), and generally, while a lot of cool talking points to familiarise yourself with, it is not what i thought it would be = not about abundance. It gives some perspective on it, though, somewhat valuable. As i digest it, i will know whether i liked it more than not.