---
title: Conservative vs Dynamic inspiration, in an attempt to make you start now.
subtitle: A short read on different creative approaches
date: 2025-10-03
---

Creation comes from inspiration - a subjective reinterpretation of a given up to the point, where one discovers something bothering about it. It may be then said, that new comes into being under some specific impression of old, making the inspiration either conservative (both positive and negative) or independent, dynamic. Ultimately, they provide for a foundation of development frameworks. Cognitive consequences deriving from either, their suitability to different fields and switching between them, are the topic of this essay.

> The Conservative Inspiration

It shall be acknowledged, that the Conservative Inspiration (CI) is the default for most. It is instilled during the course of regular education through the establishment of Points of Reference (PoR); historical figures, events or circumstances provide the theoretical reference, while the teacher himself may become one on the interpersonal level. For many, such PoRs later develop towards a straight-forward CI process: one positions a specific PoR towards his relevant experiences, and modules his opinion after it. Positive CI will then appreciate the PoR and create through furthering or contextualizing such reasoning, while a negative CI will oppose its PoR and prompt creation via structured disagreement.

Such reasoning brings us to notice, that CI binds the Creation (the effect of the creative process) to its PoR, with the former built in comparative connection to the latter; such link may remain in the subconscious of the Author or be fully embraced by the Creation, but nevertheless, it will carry some imperfections (e.g. biases or emphases distribution) from the PoR to the Creation.

Furthermore, such PoR always chronologically precedes the Creation. This condition negatively influences the capability of independent inspiration, and builds a streamlined inspiration framework based on CIs, where the subject achieves further milestones laid down by predecessors, that came to be his PoRs.

CI-based formative process is highly efficient in monosemic (rigidly designated) fields, where exactly one True State (TS) exists, and discovering more Temporary truths (true till disproven) shall strive to come closer to understanding it. It seems true only in theory, though — in practice, bound by inherent CI's bias towards obtaining certainty, Temporary truths falsely pose as the TS. An example from the semantic substrate: physics is a signified domain (exploring definitive structure and translating the order of pre-existing meanings), but physicists are biased towards operating in a signifying (discovering facts and creating new meaning order) manner1. Effectively, a longer chain of CI-led research will progress in line with the preset consensus, but straying away from the TS. It is then the technological advances and enhancements in data collection methods, that every so often allow a disruptor to come around; he then questions the consensus enough to disprove one of its fundamentals, and overturns its falsely True State. What is later labeled as a breakthrough, shall rather be called a break-in — bringing a real Truth from outside of the consensus into it. In a vague interpretation, the rise of quantum mechanics in the early 20th century showcases this process2.

> The Exit and the Extraterrestrial Inspiration

Operating (performing a series of creative processes) in the CI framework builds specific loyalties towards CI-prominent ideals. Most notably: respect towards peers and the TS, responsibility for one's Creation before the audience, designation of the canon creators and the outliers, and humility; all of them derive from the axiom of positioning against a PoR. Prolonged exposure to such environment inevitably changes one's creative capabilities through adaptation to a confirmation-driven development environment. In such, the subject builds in relation to a preexisting consensus (PoR) supplied by gathered evidence, and if the reasoning is deemed valid (conducted in line with best practices), external validator issues an acknowledgement of value. This approach is sufficient for a monosemic (one True State) field, and may deliver significant progress overtime.

It may so happen, that one encounters an incentive to leave such domain (the Exit). This Extraterrestrial3 Inspiration (EI) is often accompanied by a strong emotion or feeling, that suddenly allows the subject to "zoom out" — the monosemic paradigm then becomes just a part of a broader, polysemic one, where the previous TS is rendered as just another Temporary truth. The Exit is not a single moment, but a process; to progress towards the Dynamic, fundamental changes to the cognition, inspiration and creation processes are required.

The reason for that comes directly from the definition of the Dynamic — a field with no True State, existing on the periphery of the default Conservative field, often towards its avant-garde. Given the absence of the TS, we can no longer operate through CI and uncover it, we can't prove it right. Effectively, the confirmation-driven development cannot take place, and the CI's inspiration-feedback loop delivering the result on the end of a cycle falls apart. The Conservative framework doesn't work anymore.

The mechanics of the Dynamic field are the inversion of the Conservative field. Instead of observing, and quantifying or determining features of the TS, we imagine our Extraterrestrial Inspiration materializing (the Creation), and bend the circumstances towards that. Fundamentally, we strip our ultimate PoR (the True State in the CI's case) from its illusion of absolute trueness, and then shift it in time — from the past, to the future.

Bending the circumstances must begin with an Attempt (contrary to the CI, the EI doesn't have the comfort of building on previous findings). Such Attempt — or, for that matter, any attempt — brings the creation process closer to the Creation. Creator shall acknowledge that at the first feedback round, which measures the progress in reference to the PoR. Given he has moved our PoR into the future, though, what begins is the malfunction-driven development; the new iteration doesn't position itself as one better than the previous one, but rather worse than the next one. Therefore in the EI framework, the increment begins with the feedback round outlining malfunctions/insufficiencies, and progresses towards reaching the neutral state without them.

> Why to start now

The Exit and the Entry that follows are two never-completed challenges, reflecting the never-certain nature of the Dynamic field. On the other hand, abandoning the Conservative Inspirations completely is neither possible, nor optimal — there is some degree of knowledge one may possess conventionally, by just reading a book. The issue is, that the Extraterrestrial Inspiration starts with one vision, giving a finite amount of motivation; if it is fully devoted towards preparations, it probably won't last to break through the conventional framework (CI), resulting in performativeness, and not performance.

Additionally, aside from all new challenges incoming directly from the Dynamic field, the gravity of the Conservative field won't let go immediately. While the specifics of such force deserve a separate article, a brief explanation of its existence comes from the definition of our Point of Reference; if the Extraterrestrial Inspiration has successfully moved it forward in time (to the future), then we shall become more concerned about the time in front of us, instead of the one behind us, in order to escape that gravity4.

<html>
<i>The following paragraphs touch on more recent reflections of the author, effectively making them more subjective and personal than the rest of this text.</i>
</html>

This relates to one of many principles of the Startup world — a prime example of a Dynamic field — "always start early". Such guidance (not guidelines) correctly hints, that a set of principles on how to defy the principles does in fact exist. Following them immediately upon entry is quite hard, though, as it requires personality changes. Some new approaches must be introduced, while others removed, even if they reflect the same virtue (e.g.: rooting out risk averse doesn't imply learning risk tolerance).

Sometimes, trusting just one principle will bring in a complex approach revamp; "starting early" inherently means "starting weak and unprepared", teaching the risk tolerance. Dealing with that problem will require seeking advice, what will then create a feedback loop, and that will introduce iterative enhancement… and so on.

While the journey described in this essay is applicable to a startup, the Creation, its main point is about the Creator. There is one important difference between them, that doesn't make the Creator just another Creation: the lifespan. While the latter seem immortal in principle, in practice they just come and go multiple times throughout the Creator's career — and it is their raison d'etre. If our best attempt isn't enough to disprove the preexisting True state's monopoly on truth, then such venture just comes to an end; if the Creator is proven wrong by the reality… nothing happens.

Do I fear being seen as the one who talks much, and does little, because of writing such essay without extensive startup experience? Kinda. Do I feel like I spent too much time writing it? Maybe. Have I followed the advice from two paragraphs before? I wish I did.

But one I know for sure: just now, through writing this article, I started. And so shall you.

<html>
<b>Start now.</b>
</html>

<html>
<i>
1 — What may serve as the confirmation of this thesis, is that I myself have fallen back to the Conservative Inspiration to bring up that semantic interpretation. To pay tribute where its due: terms were somewhat familiar to me through "Ekonomia to stan umyslu" of Andrzej Leder (I should finally read it in full), who there used the terminology of de Saussure and his structural linguistics (as Claude has reminded me). Nevertheless, we arrive at another hypothesis: when we forward our curiosity too far beyond our expertise, and through that bridge the Dunning-Kruger, we may retreat from unawareness-fueled courageous exploration towards "established sources". In my personal view: they prove quite useful at times, but become a pitfall if performed too often.
<br /><br />
2 — Reader finding some other example more relevant is a delight to the author, regardless of whether the example provided made for a positive or negative inspiration towards it.
<br /><br />
3 — From many phrasings available, the author chose "Extraterrestrial" as a signifier of something extremely external and extraordinary, trying to avoid supernatural or emotional nomenclature. It doesn't have anything to do with aliens… or does it?
<br /><br />
4 — There are only few phenomenons equally detrimental to world's spirit than counting time with the reference in the past — even though what passed is just as not-present as the future. That being said, the other option, namely a countdown, also feels quite damning.
</i>
</html>